docs/actions/index.mdx, before:

# Actions

Actions are Astro server actions that wrap the WordPress REST API, providing **type-safe, authenticated write operations** from any server-side Astro context — form handlers, API routes, middleware, or server components.

Every action is a factory function that binds your WordPress credentials once and returns a reusable Astro `ActionClient`. Under the hood, each action calls an `execute*` function that performs the HTTP request and maps errors to `ActionError`.

---

## Authentication

All write operations require a WordPress **Application Password**. Application passwords are separate from the user's login password and can be scoped or revoked independently.

### Generate an application password

1. Log in to the WordPress admin.
2. Go to **Users → Profile** (or **Users → All Users → Edit** for another user).
3. Scroll to **Application Passwords**.
4. Enter a name (e.g. `Astro Integration`) and click **Add New Application Password**.
5. Copy the generated password — it is only shown once.

Store credentials in your Astro project's `.env` file:

```ini
WP_URL=https://example.com
WP_USERNAME=my-wp-user
WP_APP_PASSWORD=xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
```

### Pass credentials to an action factory

```ts
// src/actions/index.ts
import {
  createCreatePostAction,
  createUpdatePostAction,
  createDeletePostAction,
} from 'wp-astrojs-integration';

const wpConfig = {
  baseUrl: import.meta.env.WP_URL,
  auth: {
    username: import.meta.env.WP_USERNAME,
    password: import.meta.env.WP_APP_PASSWORD,
  },
};

export const server = {
  createPost: createCreatePostAction(wpConfig),
  updatePost: createUpdatePostAction(wpConfig),
  deletePost: createDeletePostAction(wpConfig),
};
```

The factory calls `createBasicAuthHeader` internally — you never handle the `Authorization` header manually in normal usage. If you are building a custom action (e.g. targeting a custom post type endpoint), you can call `createBasicAuthHeader` directly:

```ts
import { createBasicAuthHeader } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';

const authHeader = createBasicAuthHeader({
  username: import.meta.env.WP_USERNAME,
  password: import.meta.env.WP_APP_PASSWORD,
});
```

---

## Validation model

Input validation happens in two distinct layers. Understanding where each field is checked helps you handle errors correctly.

### Layer 1 — Zod (local, before the HTTP request)

These constraints are enforced by the Zod schema **before any request reaches WordPress**. A violation throws immediately in the Astro server process and never touches the network.

| Field | Constraint |
|---|---|
| `id` (update / delete) | Must be a positive integer |
| `force` (delete) | Must be a boolean |
| `status` | Must be one of `'publish'`, `'draft'`, `'pending'`, `'private'`, `'future'` |
| `comment_status` | Must be `'open'` or `'closed'` |
| `ping_status` | Must be `'open'` or `'closed'` |
| `format` | Must be one of `'standard'`, `'aside'`, `'chat'`, `'gallery'`, `'link'`, `'image'`, `'quote'`, `'status'`, `'video'`, `'audio'` |
| `sticky` | Must be a boolean |
| `author` | Must be an integer (type only — existence is not checked) |
| `featured_media` | Must be an integer (type only — existence is not checked) |
| `categories` | Must be an array of integers (type only — term existence is not checked) |
| `tags` | Must be an array of integers (type only — term existence is not checked) |
| `title`, `content`, `excerpt` | Must be strings |
| `date`, `date_gmt` | Must be strings (format is not validated — see Layer 2) |
| `slug`, `template` | Must be strings (content is not validated — see Layer 2) |
| `meta` | Must be a plain object (keys and value types are not validated) |

### Layer 2 — WordPress REST API (remote, after the HTTP request)

These fields are forwarded to WordPress without further local inspection. WordPress validates them server-side and returns a structured error if they are invalid. The action catches that response and surfaces it as an `ActionError`.

| Field | What WordPress checks |
|---|---|
| `author` | The user ID must exist and the authenticated user must be allowed to assign that author |
| `featured_media` | The attachment ID must exist and be of media type `image` |
| `categories` | Each ID must correspond to a published category term |
| `tags` | Each ID must correspond to a published tag term |
| `date` / `date_gmt` | The string must be a valid ISO 8601 date-time |
| `slug` | Accepted as-is; WordPress appends a suffix (e.g. `-2`) if it conflicts with an existing post |
| `template` | The filename must match a template registered by the active theme |
| `meta` keys | Only keys registered with `show_in_rest: true` are accepted; unregistered keys are silently ignored |

### Extra fields via `.passthrough()`

The base schema uses `.passthrough()`, meaning **any extra key you include is forwarded to WordPress without Zod touching it**. This is intentional — it allows ACF fields, custom REST fields, and other plugin data to pass through end-to-end.

Extend the schema with `.extend()` if you want Zod to validate those extra fields locally too:

```ts
import { createPostInputSchema } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';
import { z } from 'astro/zod';

const mySchema = createPostInputSchema.extend({
  acf: z.object({
    price: z.number().positive(),
    sku: z.string(),
  }).optional(),
});
```

---

## Error handling

All actions surface failures as `ActionError`. Use the `error` field returned by `Astro.callAction`:

```ts
const { data, error } = await Astro.callAction(actions.createPost, {
  title: 'My Post',
  status: 'publish',
});

if (error) {
  // error.code  — HTTP status mapped to an Astro error code string
  // error.message — original WordPress error message, passed through verbatim
  console.error(error.code, error.message);
}
```

The `message` is taken directly from the WordPress `{ code, message, data }` error response and not modified. This means it reflects exactly what WordPress rejected and why.

### Common error codes

| `error.code` | HTTP status | Typical cause |
|---|---|---|
| `UNAUTHORIZED` | 401 | Missing, wrong, or expired application password |
| `FORBIDDEN` | 403 | Authenticated user lacks capability for the operation |
| `NOT_FOUND` | 404 | Post / term / attachment ID does not exist |
| `UNPROCESSABLE_CONTENT` | 422 | Invalid field value (bad date format, unknown template, etc.) |
| `BAD_REQUEST` | 400 | Malformed request body |
| `INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR` | 500 | WordPress or PHP error on the server |

> Zod validation failures (Layer 1) are surfaced as `BAD_REQUEST` before the request is sent.

---

## The `execute*` pattern

Every action file exports two things:

- **`create*Action(config)`** — the Astro `ActionClient` factory for use in `src/actions/index.ts`.
- **`execute*(config, input)`** — the raw async HTTP handler, useful for testing or building custom actions that target a different REST endpoint (e.g. a custom post type).

```ts
import { executeCreatePost } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';
import { createBasicAuthHeader } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';

const config = {
  apiBase: 'https://example.com/wp-json/wp/v2/products', // custom endpoint
  authHeader: createBasicAuthHeader({ username, password }),
};

const post = await executeCreatePost(config, { title: 'My Product', status: 'publish' });
```

This is also how integration tests call actions directly — without needing the Astro runtime. See [Testing](#) for the full pattern.

Commit message:

feat: make actions generic across post types with resource parameter
Add resource config to execute* functions and create*Action factories so
the same action code targets posts, pages, or any custom post type by
REST base name. Relax schema fields (comment_status, ping_status, format)
to plain strings for cross-type compatibility and add password, parent,
menu_order fields.

Add integration tests for pages (11 tests) and books CPT (10 tests),
book CPT mu-plugin, seed data for 10 books, and update docs/AGENTS.md
to reflect the new resource-based pattern.

docs/actions/index.mdx, after:

# Actions

Actions are Astro server actions that wrap the WordPress REST API, providing **type-safe, authenticated write operations** from any server-side Astro context — form handlers, API routes, middleware, or server components.

Every action is a factory function that binds your WordPress credentials once and returns a reusable Astro `ActionClient`. Under the hood, each action calls an `execute*` function that performs the HTTP request and maps errors to `ActionError`.

---

## Authentication

All write operations require a WordPress **Application Password**. Application passwords are separate from the user's login password and can be scoped or revoked independently.

### Generate an application password

1. Log in to the WordPress admin.
2. Go to **Users → Profile** (or **Users → All Users → Edit** for another user).
3. Scroll to **Application Passwords**.
4. Enter a name (e.g. `Astro Integration`) and click **Add New Application Password**.
5. Copy the generated password — it is only shown once.

Store credentials in your Astro project's `.env` file:

```ini
WP_URL=https://example.com
WP_USERNAME=my-wp-user
WP_APP_PASSWORD=xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
```

### Pass credentials to an action factory

```ts
// src/actions/index.ts
import {
  createCreatePostAction,
  createUpdatePostAction,
  createDeletePostAction,
} from 'wp-astrojs-integration';

const wpConfig = {
  baseUrl: import.meta.env.WP_URL,
  auth: {
    username: import.meta.env.WP_USERNAME,
    password: import.meta.env.WP_APP_PASSWORD,
  },
};

export const server = {
  createPost: createCreatePostAction(wpConfig),
  updatePost: createUpdatePostAction(wpConfig),
  deletePost: createDeletePostAction(wpConfig),
};
```

The factory calls `createBasicAuthHeader` internally — you never handle the `Authorization` header manually in normal usage. If you are building a custom action (e.g. targeting a custom post type endpoint), you can call `createBasicAuthHeader` directly:

```ts
import { createBasicAuthHeader } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';

const authHeader = createBasicAuthHeader({
  username: import.meta.env.WP_USERNAME,
  password: import.meta.env.WP_APP_PASSWORD,
});
```

---

## Validation model

Input validation happens in two distinct layers. Understanding where each field is checked helps you handle errors correctly.

### Layer 1 — Zod (local, before the HTTP request)

These constraints are enforced by the Zod schema **before any request reaches WordPress**. A violation throws immediately in the Astro server process and never touches the network.

| Field | Constraint |
|---|---|
| `id` (update / delete) | Must be a positive integer |
| `force` (delete) | Must be a boolean |
| `status` | Must be one of `'publish'`, `'draft'`, `'pending'`, `'private'`, `'future'` |
| `comment_status` | Must be a string (type only — not all post types support comments) |
| `ping_status` | Must be a string (type only — not all post types support pingbacks) |
| `format` | Must be a string (type only — only the built-in `post` type supports formats) |
| `sticky` | Must be a boolean |
| `password` | Must be a string |
| `author` | Must be an integer (type only — existence is not checked) |
| `featured_media` | Must be an integer (type only — existence is not checked) |
| `categories` | Must be an array of integers (type only — term existence is not checked) |
| `tags` | Must be an array of integers (type only — term existence is not checked) |
| `parent` | Must be an integer (type only — used by hierarchical types like pages) |
| `menu_order` | Must be an integer (type only — used by hierarchical types like pages) |
| `title`, `content`, `excerpt` | Must be strings |
| `date`, `date_gmt` | Must be strings (format is not validated — see Layer 2) |
| `slug`, `template` | Must be strings (content is not validated — see Layer 2) |
| `meta` | Must be a plain object (keys and value types are not validated) |

### Layer 2 — WordPress REST API (remote, after the HTTP request)

These fields are forwarded to WordPress without further local inspection. WordPress validates them server-side and returns a structured error if they are invalid. The action catches that response and surfaces it as an `ActionError`.

| Field | What WordPress checks |
|---|---|
| `author` | The user ID must exist and the authenticated user must be allowed to assign that author |
| `featured_media` | The attachment ID must exist and be of media type `image` |
| `categories` | Each ID must correspond to a published category term |
| `tags` | Each ID must correspond to a published tag term |
| `date` / `date_gmt` | The string must be a valid ISO 8601 date-time |
| `slug` | Accepted as-is; WordPress appends a suffix (e.g. `-2`) if it conflicts with an existing post |
| `template` | The filename must match a template registered by the active theme |
| `meta` keys | Only keys registered with `show_in_rest: true` are accepted; unregistered keys are silently ignored |

### Extra fields via `.passthrough()`

The base schema uses `.passthrough()`, meaning **any extra key you include is forwarded to WordPress without Zod touching it**. This is intentional — it allows ACF fields, custom REST fields, and other plugin data to pass through end-to-end.

Extend the schema with `.extend()` if you want Zod to validate those extra fields locally too:

```ts
import { createPostInputSchema } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';
import { z } from 'astro/zod';

const mySchema = createPostInputSchema.extend({
  acf: z.object({
    price: z.number().positive(),
    sku: z.string(),
  }).optional(),
});
```

---

## Error handling

All actions surface failures as `ActionError`. Use the `error` field returned by `Astro.callAction`:

```ts
const { data, error } = await Astro.callAction(actions.createPost, {
  title: 'My Post',
  status: 'publish',
});

if (error) {
  // error.code  — HTTP status mapped to an Astro error code string
  // error.message — original WordPress error message, passed through verbatim
  console.error(error.code, error.message);
}
```

The `message` is taken directly from the WordPress `{ code, message, data }` error response and not modified. This means it reflects exactly what WordPress rejected and why.

### Common error codes

| `error.code` | HTTP status | Typical cause |
|---|---|---|
| `UNAUTHORIZED` | 401 | Missing, wrong, or expired application password |
| `FORBIDDEN` | 403 | Authenticated user lacks capability for the operation |
| `NOT_FOUND` | 404 | Post / term / attachment ID does not exist |
| `UNPROCESSABLE_CONTENT` | 422 | Invalid field value (bad date format, unknown template, etc.) |
| `BAD_REQUEST` | 400 | Malformed request body |
| `INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR` | 500 | WordPress or PHP error on the server |

> Zod validation failures (Layer 1) are surfaced as `BAD_REQUEST` before the request is sent.

---

## The `execute*` pattern

Every action file exports two things:

- **`create*Action(config)`** — the Astro `ActionClient` factory for use in `src/actions/index.ts`.
- **`execute*(config, input)`** — the raw async HTTP handler, useful for testing or building custom actions that target a different REST resource (e.g. a custom post type).

```ts
import { executeCreatePost, createBasicAuthHeader } from 'wp-astrojs-integration';

const config = {
  apiBase: 'https://example.com/wp-json/wp/v2',
  authHeader: createBasicAuthHeader({ username, password }),
  resource: 'products', // targets /wp-json/wp/v2/products
};

const product = await executeCreatePost(config, { title: 'My Product', status: 'publish' });
```

When `resource` is omitted it defaults to `'posts'`. See [Post actions — Pages and custom post types](./posts.mdx#pages-and-custom-post-types) for the full pattern.

This is also how integration tests call actions directly — without needing the Astro runtime.
